## Multi-modal Chest X-Ray analysis: classification and report generation using self-supervised learning

# Master's thesis project

Automated medical systems for classification, localization and diagnosis are in- creasingly being researched and developed. Accurate and automated disease de- tection is beneficial both to medical personnel, who do not have to perform te- dious examinations and to patients, for whom accurate prediction could save their lives. In this work, the models involved in classification and report generation from chest X-rays are studied. Due to the widespread use of the latter, we were able to collect several datasets, which allowed us to employ the self-supervised learning paradigm. This paradigm allows the methods to learn more represen- tative and inherent internal representations for the domain in question. Two different models are used in this project, one for classification and the other for language modelling. The former is pretrained with the BarlowTwins framework, which is fed two modified copies of the same example, and a custom loss func- tion allows learning of internal weights invariant to the applied transformations. The possible improvements that this approach brings are verified by performing a classification task on a reference dataset and compared with the same model which has not been pretrained with the proposed method. Regarding the lan- guage model, a pretraining step was performed at the character level on a large text corpus that includes a collection of medical reports. The fine-tuning process is the culmination of this project and involves the merging of the two models, with the former providing meaningful embeddings and the latter transforming these inputs into natural language. We were able to verify that pre-training with Bar- lowTwins, brings improvements in classification performance, and by pretraining the language model, one is able to generate text with appropriate grammatical and semantic correctness. However, fine-tuning did not bring satisfactory results, making this a starting point for future studies.
